=head1 NAME

optargs - declarative options and arguments for Perl scripts

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use optargs;

    opt quiet => (
        isa     => 'Bool',
        alias   => 'q',
        comment => 'be quiet please',
    );

    arg item => (
        isa     => 'Str',
        default => 1,
        comment => 'try this many times',
    );

    print "Working on: ". optargs->item ."\n"
        unless optargs->quiet;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<optargs> provides command-line option and argument processing for
Perl scripts.  It is designed to be a very simple way to write programs
using a declarative style. L<Getopt::Long> is used for the underlying
parsing.

How exactly does one define a command line application? B<optargs>
assumes a fairly common (but by no means universal) approach:

=over

=item Command

The program name - i.e. the filename be executed by the shell.

=item Options

Options are parameters that affect the way a command runs. They are
generally not required to be present, but that is configurable. Options
are prefixed with '-' for single letter option names or '--' for long
option names.

=item Arguments

Arguments are positional parameters that that a command needs know in
order to do its work. Some arguments may be optional.

=item Sub-commands

A command may also have sub-commands with their own options and
arguments.  From the users point of view sub-commands and their options
are indisinguishable from options and arguments to the main command,
but from an implementation perspective they could (perhaps should) be
separate, stand-alone programs, with possibly their own set of
sub-commands.

=back

=head2 Declaring Options and Arguments

B<optargs> exports the following functions for defining Options and
Arguments. The order in which they are defined also determines the
order they appear in usage messages, and the order in which they are
processed.

=over

=item opt name => ( %parameters )

Define a Command Option with the following parameters:

=over

=item isa

Required. Is mapped to a L<Getopt::Long> type according to the
following table:

     optargs         Getopt::Long
    ------------------------------
     'Bool'          '!'
     'Counter'       '+'
     'Str'           '=s'
     'Int'           '=i'
     'Num'           '=f'
     'ArrayRef'      's@'
     'HashRef'       's%'

=item comment

Required. Used to generate the usage/help message.

=item default

The value set when the option is not used.

If this is a subroutine reference it will be called after parsing has
finished.

=item alias

Can be single characters or words separated by '|' if more than one
alias is desired. If the option name contains underscores ('_') then an
alias with '-' substitutions will be automatically added.

=back

=item arg name => ( %parameters )

Define a Command Argument with the following parameters:

=over

=item isa

Required. Is mapped to a L<Getopt::Long> type according to the
following table:

     optargs         Getopt::Long
    ------------------------------
     'Str'           '=s'
     'Int'           '=i'
     'Num'           '=f'
     'ArrayRef'      's@'
     'HashRef'       's%'

=item comment

Required. Used to generate the usage/help message.

=item required

Set to a true value when the caller must specify this argument.  Can
not be used if a 'default' is given.

=item default

The value set when the argument is not given. Can not be used if
'required' is set.

If this is a subroutine reference it will be called after parsing has
finished.

=back

=back

Note that any call to opt() or arg() causes the next call to opts(),
args() or optargs() (described below) to reset their values and reparse
@ARGV, so you probably want to define all your options and arguments
before retrieving their values.

=head2 Parsing and Retrieving Values

B<optargs> exports the following functions for parsing and retriving
option and argument values. They all parse @ARGV by default (or @argv
when given) for options and arguments.  An error / usage message will
be generated if an invalid combination of options and arguments has
been given.

=over

=item opts( [ @argv ] ) -> Blessed HashRef

Return a hashref containing key/value pairs for the I<options only>.
The hashref is blessed into $caller::_opts and has accessor methods for
each option.

=item args( [ @argv ] ) -> Blessed HashRef

Return a hashref containing key/value pairs for the I<arguments only>.
The hashref is blessed into $caller::_args and has accessor methods for
each option.

=item optargs( [ @argv ] ) -> Blessed HashRef

Return a hashref containing key/value pairs for options and arguments
I<combined>. The hashref is blessed into $caller::_optargs and has
accessor methods for each value.

=back

These function nearly behave like singletons: they will return the same
hashref each time they are called unless @ARGV changes, a new @argv is
given, or opt() or arg() are called.

=head2 Utility Functions

=over

=item usage() -> Str

Returns a usage string based on the defined opts and args. Can be
called at any time.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Getopt::Long>

=head1 SUPPORT & DEVELOPMENT


This distribution is managed via github:

    http://github.com/mlawren/optargs

Code is tidied up on Git commit using githook-perltidy:

    http://github.com/mlawren/githook-perltidy

Test coverage according to L<Devel::Cover> is as follows:

    --------------------------------------------------------------
    File                  stmt  bran  cond   sub   pod  time total
    --------------------------------------------------------------
    blib/lib/optargs.pm   98.8  89.7 100.0 100.0 100.0  91.1  97.0
    lib/optargs.pod      100.0   n/a   n/a 100.0   n/a   8.9 100.0
    Total                 98.9  89.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0  97.0
    --------------------------------------------------------------

=head1 AUTHOR

Mark Lawrence <nomad@null.net>

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright 2012 Mark Lawrence <nomad@null.net>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

